        Degree Project in Computer Science and Engineering
        Second cycle, 30 credits




        Adversarial training for diagnosis
        based on the electrocardiogram
        Making deep learning analysis of the electrocardiogram
        more robust

        ARVID ERIKSSON




Stockholm, Sweden, 2024
Adversarial training for diagnosis
based on the electrocardiogram

Making deep learning analysis of the
electrocardiogram more robust



ARVID ERIKSSON




Degree Programme in Computer Science and Engineering
Date: June 13, 2024

Supervisors: Antonio H. Ribeiro, Joakim Jaldén
Examiner: Erik Fransén
  School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Host company: Uppsala University
Swedish title: Motstridig träning för diagnostisering av elektrokardiogram
Swedish subtitle: Ett sätt att göra djupinlärningsanalyser av elektrokardiogram
mer robusta
© 2024 Arvid Eriksson
                                                                       Abstract | i




Abstract
Automated electrocardiogram (ECG) analysis using deep neural networks has
seen promising results in recent years in various fields such as arrhythmia
diagnosis and mortality prediction through age proxies. However, these deep
learning models are susceptible to small indistinguishable perturbations that
change the model prediction. These models also perform significantly worse
when faced with domain shifts when applied to new data distributions not
previously trained on.
    This thesis investigates how training on worst-case artificial samples
through adversarial training can help generate models that can readily
be adapted through fine-tuning to new datasets. Investigations are done
by conducting robustness and transferability experiments using adversarial
training on three different tasks in ECG analysis: atrial fibrillation diagnosis,
sex classification, and age prediction.
    These experiments show that adversarial training creates models that
generalize better and can be more eﬀiciently adapted to new datasets with
higher performance than non-adversarially trained models. This work thus
paves the way for models that perform better on new datasets thus requiring
less data for fine-tuning. This enables the use of high-performing models in
settings where data is more scarce, thus enabling ECG analysis tools suitable
in developing countries and smaller hospitals.
    The experiments also show that adversarial training improves the
robustness of the trained models and that this robustness is retained to a smaller
degree when transferred to new settings. This yields models that can withstand
smaller directed perturbations without significantly changing their prediction.
Thus this work also enables more consistent models, which in turn yields
models that are more trustworthy.

Keywords
Deep learning, Adversarial training, Electrocardiogram
ii | Abstract
                                                          Sammanfattning | iii




Sammanfattning
Analys av elektrokardiogram (EKG) med hjälp av djupinlärning har sett stora
framsteg senaste åren, bland annat vid diagnostik av hjärtarytmi, förutsägande
av ålder utifrån EKG samt dödlighetsanalyser via åldersregressioner. Dessa
modeller är dock känsliga till algoritmer som introducerar mycket små
omärkbara förändringar i indatan som får modellen att ge ett så inkorrekt svar
som möjligt. Dessutom preseterar dessutom dessa modeller betydligt sämre
när de appliceras i nya miljöer som de inte tränats på.
    Denna masteruppsats avser därmed undersöka hur träning på artificiell
indata genererad genom adversarial attacks, så kallad motstridig träning
(eng. adversarial training), kan skapa nya modeller som är så pass allmänna
att de motstår både adversarial attacks och effektivt kan appliceras i nya
miljöer via finjustering av modellparametrarna. Detta görs genom robusthets-
och överförbarhetsexperiment som använder sig av motstridig träning i
tre tillämpningsområden för djuplärning inom EKG-analys: diagnos av
förmaksflimmer, könsklassificering och åldersregression.
    Experimenten visar att motstridig träning skapar modeller som genera-
liserar bättre och som kan anpassas till nya dataset och där prestera bättre
än motsvarande vanliga djupinlärningsmodeller. Detta masterarbete främjar
därför modeller som presterar bättre på nya dataset och därmed kräver mindre
data för finjustering. Detta bidrar därmed till högpresterande modeller i
miljöer där data är begränsad. Detta kan i sin tur vara användbart i analys
av EKG i utvecklingsländer eller mindre sjukhus där data är betydligt mer
svårtillgänglig.
    Experimenten visar att motstridig träning kraftigt reducerar känsligheten
gentemot små, avsiktliga förändringar och därmed skapar robustare modeller
och att de även är robustare efter finjustering. Detta skapar modeller som
därmed kan motstå små förändringar i indatan utan motsvarande stora
förändringar i utdatan. Detta arbete visar därmed hur mer konsekventa
modeller kan skapas, vilket i sin tur leder till ökad tillit.

Nyckelord
Djupinlärning, Motstridig träning, Elektrokardiogram
iv | Sammanfattning
                                                         Acknowledgments | v




Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Antonio H. Ribeiro for his tireless effort in supervising
this thesis.

Stockholm, June 2024
Arvid Eriksson
vi | Acknowledgments
                                                                 Contents | vii




Contents

1   Introduction                                                             1
    1.1 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     1
    1.2 Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2
         1.2.1 Research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     2
    1.3 Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
    1.4 Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
    1.5 Research Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       3
    1.6 Delimitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    4

2   Background                                                             5
    2.1 Deep learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
        2.1.1 Deep learning for the electrocardiogram . . . . . . . . 6
    2.2 Adversarial attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
        2.2.1 Measuring robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
    2.3 Improving robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
    2.4 Adversarial training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
    2.5 Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

3   Methods                                                                  11
    3.1 Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11
        3.1.1 CODE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       11
        3.1.2 PTB-XL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         12
        3.1.3 Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      12
    3.2 Adversarial attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    12
        3.2.1 Fast Gradient Signed Method . . . . . . . . . . . . .          13
        3.2.2 Projected gradient descent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       13
        3.2.3 Adversarial training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     14
    3.3 Deep learning architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    15
        3.3.1 Convolutional layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       15
viii | Contents




          3.3.2   Model architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

4 Implementation                                                            19
  4.1 Model training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      19
       4.1.1 Adversarial training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     19
  4.2 Robustness experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       20
  4.3 Transferability experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      20
  4.4 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
  4.5 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    22

5 Conclusions and future work                                               27
  5.1 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27
  5.2 Limitations and future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       28
      5.2.1 Computational cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        28
      5.2.2 Generalizability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      28
      5.2.3 Clinical relevance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      29
  5.3 Reflections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     29

References                                                                  31
                                                            List of Figures | ix




List of Figures

 2.1   An artificial neural network with a single hidden layer,
       courtesy of Colin M.L. Burnett. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        6
 2.2   An example of an electrocardiogram from the PTB-XL dataset
       [16]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7
 2.3   Comparison of normal ECG and corresponding adversarial
       example with a perturbation size of ε = 0.01. A normally
       trained model predicts with Prob > 0.99 that the ECG is
       normal while for the adversarially modified ECG, the model
       predicts atrial fibrillation with Prob > 0.99. . . . . . . . . . .     8

 3.1   Simplified scheme of adversarial training for predicting atrial
       fibrillation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
 3.2   Example of a one-dimensional convolutional layer without a
       bias. The kernel (orange) contains the trainable parameters. . .      15
 3.3   The residual convolutional neural network model architecture
       used in this thesis, replacing the ReLU layers with GELU.
       (Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
       http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) [1] . . . . . . . .      16
 3.4   Comparison of the ReLU and GELU activation functions. . . .           17

 4.1   Robust performance classifying atrial fibrillation on PTB-XL
       for baseline (base) and two adversarially trained models with
       εmax = 0.05 (adv. 5e-2) and εmax = 0.01 (adv. 1e-2) respectively. 23
 4.2   Robust performance classifying sex on PTB-XL for baseline
       (base) and two adversarially trained models with εmax = 0.05
       (adv. 5e-2) and εmax = 0.01 (adv. 1e-2) respectively. . . . . . . 24
 4.3   Robust performance predicting age on PTB-XL for baseline
       (base) and two adversarially trained models with εmax = 0.05
       (adv. 5e-2) and εmax = 0.01 (adv. 1e-2) respectively. . . . . . . 24
x | List of Figures




    4.4   Robust performance on CODE classifying atrial fibrillation
          for baseline and the three fine-tuned models in Table 4.1. The
          error bars show 95% percentile intervals using 500-iteration
          bootstrap. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
    4.5   Performance on CODE classifying sex for fine-tuned baseline
          and the two adversarial models in Table 4.2 for different sizes
          of the training set of CODE. All models were fine-tuned for
          10 epochs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
                                                           List of Tables | xi




List of Tables

 3.1   Summary of the datasets. The entries indicate the presence of
       atrial fibrillation (AF) and distributions of sex and age. . . . . 12

 4.1   Clean performance of various models classifying atrial
       fibrillation on the CODE dataset measured by area under the
       precision-recall curve (AUPRC). Under different configura-
       tions of training in PTB-XL training and fine-tuning on CODE
       for 10 epochs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
 4.2   Clean performance of various models classifying sex on the
       CODE dataset measured by area under the receiver operating
       characteristic curve (AUROC). Under different configurations
       of training in PTB-XL training and fine-tuning on CODE for
       10 epochs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
 4.3   Clean performance of various models predicting age on the
       CODE dataset measured by mean absolute error. Under
       different configurations of training in PTB-XL training and
       fine-tuning on CODE for 10 epochs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
xii | List of Tables
                                 List of acronyms and abbreviations | xiii




List of acronyms and abbreviations

APGD    Auto-PGD
AUPRC   area under the precision-recall curve
AUROC   area under the receiver operating characteristic curve

CNN     convolutional neural network

ECG     electrocardiogram

FGSM    Fast Gradient Signed Method

PGD     projected gradient descent

SDG     Sustainable Development Goal

UN      United Nations
xiv | List of acronyms and abbreviations
                                                                  Introduction | 1




Chapter 1

Introduction

This chapter describes a shorter background for the relevance of this thesis
(Section 1.1), the problem statement and research question (Section 1.2), the
purpose of the thesis (Section 1.3), its concrete goals (Section 1.4), its general
research methodological approach (Section 1.5), and its delimitations (Section
1.6).


1.1      Background
Cardiovascular diseases account for one-third of the deaths worldwide and
the electrocardiogram (ECG) is a major tool in their diagnoses. Deep neural
networks have recently achieved striking success in diverse tasks such as image
analysis and natural language processing, and there are great expectations
when it comes to how this technology may improve health care and clinical
practice. The last few years saw this technology present promising results
in the interpretation of the ECGs for cardiovascular diagnosis and stratifying
mortality risks and there are high expectations that these tools could enable
the early and accurate detection of cardiac diseases [1, 2].
    Due to the many interacting components and a large number of parameters,
deep neural network models have low robustness meaning classification
accuracy, and other key metrics, can often heavily decrease when small
perturbations on the input are applied [3]. Models for medical applications
need to work in scenarios that are potentially different than they were trained
on are sought after. This is especially key as there are many different ECG
datasets available internationally, where tools developed in one context might
be relevant in others.
    Adversarial training [4] is an effective approach for training deep learning
2 | Introduction




models that are more robust to perturbations. Mathematically, adversarial
training is formulated as a min-max problem, searching for the best solution
to the worst-case attacks. It considers the situation where the training samples
have been modified by an adversary. Since training samples are adversarially
perturbed it is expected that the model will be more robust when faced with
new perturbed samples, as well as generally noisy samples.
    An important consequence of adversarial training is that the adversarially
trained model tends to produce better representations of the data which
generally improves transferability [5]. In a medical setting, this is especially
important as exact data distribution will differ between different settings,
such as between different hospitals. Adversarial training could thus help
provide models that better represent data, such as ECG samples, and show
larger generalization capability such that a model can easily be applied across
different settings. Such a model would then help save resources as new settings
and thus domain shifts would not require the training of new models.


1.2      Problem
The problem approached in this thesis is the adversarial vulnerability in state-
of-the-art ECG deep learning models. The intention of this thesis is to promote
more robust deep learning models through adversarial training and create
models that generalize better, especially when transferred to new settings.

1.2.1 Research question
What effect do adversarial attacks and training have on relevant performance
metrics of deep learning models used for different types of 12-lead ECG
analysis, specifically diagnosing atrial fibrillation, classifying sex, and
predicting age?
   The research question is further split into the following sub-questions:

    • How vulnerable to performance decreases are convolutional neural
      network (CNN) ECG diagnosis deep learning models from adversarial
      attacks, specifically gradient-based attacks such as Auto-PGD (APGD)?

    • How will adversarial training using APGD of CNN ECG models impact
      this performance vulnerability?

    • How will adversarial training affect the transferability of state-of-the-
      art ECG models to other ECG datasets that the models have not been
                                                                Introduction | 3




      trained on?


1.3     Purpose
The purpose of this project is to advance the field of deep learning analysis
of ECGs. This will in turn help further sustainable health, give medical
doctors tools for diagnosis assistance, and promote trust and robustness of
used models. The higher robustness and generalization capabilities of these
models is also a purpose in itself as it will help with access to healthcare for
all as large models can more easily be adapted to new datasets.


1.4     Goals
The research question is broken down into the following concrete goals:

    • Measure the effects of adversarial attacks using APGD on state-of-
      the-art ECGs diagnosis models on key metrics such as area under the
      receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) and area under the
      precision-recall curve (AUPRC).

    • Measure how adversarial training of state-of-the-art ECG deep learning
      models improves their robustness to adversarial attacks.

    • Measure how adversarial training affects the transferability of state-of-
      the-art ECG deep learning models to new datasets.


1.5     Research Methodology
This thesis will conduct a general empirical study by using public datasets for
model training and evaluation, as is common in deep learning. The evaluation
will be done using test data from both the same datasets and different datasets
than the ones trained on. The effects of adversarial attacks and training on
the different generated models will thus be evaluated by obtaining metrics,
such as AUROC, AUPRC, and mean absolute error from the predictions of
the models on the test data. This will give an accurate estimate of the effects
of adversarial attacks on the different models and allow us to estimate the
effects of adversarial training. Bootstrapping will also be utilized to acquire
an estimate of the confidence intervals of these metrics. Comparisons of the
4 | Introduction




different models’ performance will then be used to confidently answer the
research question.


1.6      Delimitations
The scope of this thesis is adversarial training and how it affects performance
metrics such as AUROC and AUPRC with and without adversarial attacks.
Transferability to new datasets will also be investigated. The experiments
will only utilize CNN model architectures. Other related topics such as
investigating other types of models suitable for ECG data analysis or the
interpretability of the models will not be considered. Implementation of the
resulting model in practice, for example in a real-life medical setting, is also
not in the scope of the project. The performance under random noise will
also not be investigated as this has no clinical relevance due to already used
high-performing noise removal techniques [6].
    Furthermore, this thesis will only investigate white-box adversarial attacks
where full knowledge of the model parameters is known. This is due to the
scope of this thesis being the robustness aspect of adversarial attacks rather
than the cybersecurity aspect of securing the model from a potential adversary.
Adversarial training will also be the sole defense method investigated, other
defense methods such as defensive distillation will not be considered as they
have been shown to generally perform worse in most applications [7].
                                                                 Background | 5




Chapter 2

Background

This chapter describes the current state-of-the-art in deep learning for ECG
analysis (Section 2.1). It also describes adversarial attacks (Section 2.2),
how improving robustness can be done (Section 2.3), and the corresponding
defense method adversarial training (Section 2.4). Key related work are also
described here (Section 2.5).


2.1      Deep learning
In the past decade machine learning, and especially deep learning, has seen
massive growth due to its performance gains in various fields. It has been
used in data-driven decision-making in fields such as healthcare, finance,
marketing, and education with great success and is beginning to take a central
role in society [8].
    Deep learning in turn consists of artificial neural networks which are
compositions of functions applied to sets of computational nodes given some
parameters. These functions are applied set-wise where such a set is called a
layer and where the output of a layer is the input for the next layer. See Figure
2.1 for an example artificial neural network where each layer is the result of
a function, usually a composition of a non-linear and linear function, applied
on the previous layer.
    Deep learning, which is generally seen as artificial neural networks
with multiple layers, comprises many different model architectures that are
useful for different scenarios. These architectures give a framework for the
relationships between each layer and what types of functions are used. For
example, the transformer architecture [9] is very eﬀicient in natural language
processing while the convolutional neural network architecture is eﬀicient in
6 | Background




Figure 2.1: An artificial neural network with a single hidden layer, courtesy
of Colin M.L. Burnett.


image analysis [10].

2.1.1 Deep learning for the electrocardiogram
Artificial intelligence in general and deep learning especially has seen great
success in the automated analysis of the ECG [11]. Deep learning has, for
example, been shown to be able to with great accuracy detect left ventricular
dysfunction [12], atrial fibrillation [1], and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy [13]
as well as predict other features such as clinical age, which in turn can be a
predictor for general health [14]. This makes deep learning models promising
tools for medical professionals and an important topic for further advancement
of ECG analysis.
    The reason for deep learning’s eﬀiciency in the analysis of the ECG can
be attributed to both an abundance of data and suitable model architectures.
Since the ECG is a common recording there are several public datasets for
such recordings, some of which are available publicly with more than 100 000
unique samples [15, 16]. The amount of data is a key factor for the performance
of deep learning models and this relatively high amount of data therefore yields
high-performing models. Despite this, some diseases are rare and do not
have enough support in actual data to generalize well with and thus require
additional methods for regularization.
    As model architecture is also vital for the performance of the models
another attributing factor is the recent use of convolutional neural networks
                                                                 Background | 7




Figure 2.2: An example of an electrocardiogram from the PTB-XL dataset
[16].


using residual connections. Convolutional neural networks, which is a
type of deep learning architecture, is a state-of-the-art architecture used in
deep learning ECG analysis [11]. The suitability of this architecture can
be motivated by its translational invariance property which, much like in
computer vision, allows the model to find patterns in the data regardless of
where in the sequence it is located. This means that the model often will
be able to capture important features, such as rapid and irregular beatings
signifying atrial fibrillation, independent of at which exact time in the ECG
these patterns can be observed.


2.2      Adversarial attacks
While deep learning models have shown striking performance in various
number of areas they often also suffer from being sensitive to small
perturbations, especially adversarially generated perturbations [17]. These
adversarially generated perturbations, or adversarial attacks, are constructed
by modifying the input of a model by maximizing the model error under some
small perturbation threshold ε which acts as an upper limit of the perturbation.
These thresholds are usually so small that they are indistinguishable by a
human from real data. Common examples of this are seen in computer vision,
where an image of a certain class has its pixels modified by a tiny amount to
generate a nearly identical image that the model confidently sees as an entirely
different class. For ECGs, such attacks can instead be seen as tiny changes
in the signal, often with some type of smoothing to make the perturbations
indiscernible from the original [3].
    Adversarial attacks can generally be defined as a set of algorithms that seek
to, given some knowledge of a model, create an indiscernible change in the
data that makes the model misclassify the data. These algorithms can further
8 | Background




                                      Original
                                      Adversarial




Figure 2.3: Comparison of normal ECG and corresponding adversarial
example with a perturbation size of ε = 0.01. A normally trained model
predicts with Prob > 0.99 that the ECG is normal while for the adversarially
modified ECG, the model predicts atrial fibrillation with Prob > 0.99.


be divided into black-box and white-box algorithms which assume limited or
full knowledge of the model respectively. This thesis focuses on the robustness
aspect of adversarial training rather than the cybersecurity aspect and thus
white-box algorithms will only be considered.
     A common adversarial white-box attack is Fast Gradient Signed Method
(FGSM) and its corresponding extension projected gradient descent (PGD),
both described in detail in Section 3.2. These have seen wide use in the field of
adversarial attacks due to their simplicity and eﬀiciency in finding adversarial
examples under some maximum perturbation ε [7]. See Figure 2.3 for an
adversarial example generated from an ECG.

2.2.1 Measuring robustness
As robustness to adversarial attacks often wants to be compared between
models suitable metrics for measuring robustness are needed. Large studies
have researched different metrics for robustness and their relevance for
adversarial attacks [18]. Some such metrics search an entire region around
each sample to find an accurate worst-case scenario, however, such methods
are extremely costly. A good compromise between finding a worst-case
scenario and being computationally feasible is to use the accuracy for
adversarial samples generated by PGD for some range ε on test datasets from
the same distribution as the one trained on [7]. However, this metric also
depends on the parameters of the PGD which tend to differ in the literature,
making comparisons diﬀicult. Efforts have been made to move to versions
with perturbation radius ε as the only parameter however these are only
recently being adapted through APGD [19].
                                                                   Background | 9




2.3      Improving robustness
Many attempts at improving robustness, loosely defined as consistency
between small changes in model input and corresponding output, have been
made in the literature in recent years. Some of these methods include detecting
and eliminating small changes in the input [20], weakening the impact of
changes in the input through different types of data transformation [21], and
optimizing the model architecture itself to be robust [22]. However, most of
these have quickly been shown to only be robust under certain scenarios and
not as general as first thought [23].
    The currently most consistent methods for making models robust are
instead focused on strengthening the model itself, often through exposure to
new types of data. The most prevalent among these is data augmentation,
which has seen a huge impact for regularization and robustness in
especially computer vision [24]. These techniques generally revolve around
manipulating existing data with realistic alterations in order to create more
inputs and thus help with the regularization of the model. An eﬀicient
and widely used such technique for robustness is adversarial training, where
training is done using samples augmented by adversarial attacks. [25].


2.4      Adversarial training
Adversarial training is generally considered to be the most effective defense
against adversarial attacks [25, 26, 27] and consists of including samples
perturbed by adversarial attacks during training. Adversarial training thus tries
to create a robust model that can classify the worst perturbed samples correctly.
     In practice, adversarial training consists of adversarially perturbing the
input samples during training. An example is adding FGSM to the loss
function during training, although this has been shown to sometimes lead to
a failure mode called catastrophic overfitting [28]. While training using PGD
is slower by a factor equal to the number of steps used, it is still seen as state-
of-the-art in adversarial training due to its effect on robustness [7]. However,
a problem with PGD is the need for hyperparameter tuning since PGD takes
arguments such as the number of steps, step size, and projection size. There
have been attempts to solve this such as using a parameter-free adaptive tuning
of the hyperparameters through APGD as introduced in [19].
10 | Background




2.5      Related work
Ribeiro et al. [1] shows how residual convolutional neural networks can be
utilized for multi-label classification of 12-lead ECGs in order to diagnose
several abnormalities such as atrial fibrillation and first-degree atrioventricular
block. The work also produces several repositories containing code which is
reused in this thesis, mostly for creating similar models.
     Han et al. [3] provide an overview of how adversarial attacks can be
applied to deep learning in ECG analysis. The work shows that deep learning
models for ECG analysis are in general susceptible to adversarial attacks
but that most adversarial attacks will create unnatural sequences that can be
identified as artificial by a medical professional. They therefore also apply
Gaussian smoothing operations on the adversarial examples which retain the
examples’ adversarial qualities while making the examples indistinguishable
from their corresponding true samples. They therefore provide a clear
framework for generating adversarial samples for ECG data.
     The concept of adversarial training for ECG analysis has been studied
before in [29, 30, 31] under various scopes. Hossain et al. [29] investigate
using a Conditional Generative Adversarial Network for adversarial training,
while Shao et al. [30] attempt combining defensive distillation with
adversarial training with promising results. Ma and Liang [31] analyze
how adversarial training and some other training regimes provide robustness
to adversarial and random noise and implement this using a CNN capable
of variable input length. These papers, however, limit their experiments
to training and testing on the same dataset and make no transferability
experiments. They also base their experiments of robustness on PGD with
different hyperparameters. Further advancement in the field could thus
be using the parameter-free APGD as well as analyzing the transferability
implications of adversarial training. Other techniques for robustness for
ECG models have also been attempted, mainly general data augmentation
as described by [32]. These augmentations show a slight increase in the
performance of the final model.
                                                                  Methods | 11




Chapter 3

Methods

This chapter describes the methods and data used in this thesis. Section 3.1
describes the datasets used in the experiments and how it is preprocessed.
Section 3.2 describes how adversarial attacks are implemented and how they
are integrated using adversarial training. Section 3.3 describes the deep
learning architecture used in this thesis.


3.1     Data
This thesis uses two ECG datasets in its experiments: the CODE dataset [15]
and PTB-XL dataset [16].

3.1.1 CODE
The Clinical Outcomes in Digital Electrocardiography (CODE) dataset was
developed with the database of digital ECG exams of the telehealth network of
Minas Gerais and a detailed description of the cohort can be obtained at [15].
    The data set was collected between 2010 and 2017 from 811 counties in the
state of Minas Gerais, Brazil, and consists of 2 322 513 12-lead ECG records
from 1 676 384 different patients. A subset of 15% of this data set, CODE-
15%, is available online [33] and is the variant used for this paper, containing
345 779 samples. This variant will be referred to as CODE for the remainder
of this thesis. Ages under 18 are omitted for age prediction.
12 | Methods




3.1.2 PTB-XL
PTB-XL [16] is a dataset consisting of 21 799 12-lead ECG records collected
between 1989 and 1996 from 18 869 different patients using devices from
Schiller AG. It covers a larger range of diagnostic statements than the CODE
dataset, with additional types of arrhythmias and diagnostics annotated. Some
samples lack notation for age, however, and are omitted in experiments
predicting the patient’s age. Ages under 18 are also omitted for age prediction.

Table 3.1: Summary of the datasets. The entries indicate the presence of atrial
fibrillation (AF) and distributions of sex and age.

                      CODE (n = 345 779)        PTB-XL (n = 21 837)
        AF            7 033 (2.0%)              1 514 (6.9%)
        Male          139 203 (40.3%)           11 354 (52.1%)
        Female        206 576 (59.7%)           10 445 (47.9%)
        Ages 18-25    33 096 (9.6%)             838 (3.8%)
        Ages 26-40    67 129 (19.4%)            2 105 (9.7%)
        Ages 41-60    100 783 (29.2%)           7 193 (33.0%)
        Ages 61-80    112 636 (32.6%)           9 137 (41.9%)
        Ages ≥81      28 155 (8.1%)             2 100 (9.6%)



3.1.3 Preprocessing
The ECG signals have been resampled such that all ECGs have the same
sampling frequency of 400 Hz. Each input ECG has 4 096 time samples for
each of the 12 standard ECG leads. Original signals of a shorter time span
have been extended through zero-padding. The samples are also preprocessed
through a baseline high-pass filter and a power line notch filter. The class
label comprises binary scalar variables corresponding to positive or negative
diagnoses for the classification tasks and the predicted age for the regression
task.


3.2     Adversarial attacks
In adversarial attacks, an adversary changes the input to the model to maximize
the prediction error. It is formulated as a maximization problem, where the
                                                                   Methods | 13




perturbation δ that will be added is computed through the problem

                            arg max L(θ, x + δ, y)
                               δ∈S


where S = {δ : ∥δ∥p ≤ ε}, ε is the perturbation radius, and L(θ, x, y)
is the model loss using model parameters θ for an input sample x and its
corresponding true label y.
    This section describes FGSM and its extension and state-of-the-art
adversarial attack PGD.

3.2.1 Fast Gradient Signed Method
The FGSM is an adversarial attack that seeks to maximize the loss by taking
a small step, ε, along the gradient of the loss function L:

                       xadv = x + ε sgn(∇x L(θ, x, y))                      (3.1)

where x is the input, y is the true label, and θ is the model parameters.

3.2.2 Projected gradient descent
PGD is a generalization of FGSM where an arbitrary number of steps can be
taken instead of FGSM’s single step. This is done by iteratively taking steps
in the gradient of the loss originating from the previous step:

                  xt+1 = Πx+S (xt + α sgn(∇x L(θ, xt , y)))                 (3.2)

where α is the step size and Π is the projection operator.
    An important note here is that since a new loss is calculated each iteration,
the final adversarial sample will be costly to generate, having the number of
gradient calculations scaling linearly with the number of steps. Doing this
for many samples will therefore have a high computational overhead. This is
extremely expensive in computer vision, but the cost is manageable with ECGs
due to the lower dimensionality.
    In this thesis, APGD is used as an improved version of PGD as described
in [19] which makes the step size adaptively scheduled during iterations in
an explore-exploit-like fashion. APGD therefore removes the need to tune
the parameter α and therefore only relies on the number of iterations and the
boundary S, which in turn only relies on ε.
14 | Methods




                                                   Backprop


                                                                 Normal
                                                   Model
                                                                  AFib

                          Generate
                       adversarial noise




Figure 3.1: Simplified scheme of adversarial training for predicting atrial
fibrillation.


3.2.3 Adversarial training
Adversarial training can be formulated as a min-max problem where the
training procedure seeks to find the best solution for the worst-case attacks:
                                   [                     ]
                     min E(x,y)∼D max L(θ, x + δ, y)                       (3.3)
                       θ                   δ∈S

where (x, y) ∼ D is the training data sampled from the dataset D and S is
the set of allowed perturbations. S is usually dependent on some ε such that
S = {δ : ∥δ∥p ≤ ε} where p = 2, representing the euclidean norm, or p = ∞,
representing the max-norm, are both common choices.
    As an estimation of the min-max problem in Equation 3.3, adversarial
training is performed by integrating samples generated by adversarial attacks
during training. As suggested in [31] the perturbations should ideally be
introduced later in the training to avoid early divergence of the model. The
perturbation threshold ε of the perturbations can also be scheduled to gradually
increase over time to further avoid rapid divergence when the perturbations are
introduced. These aspects are integrated during the experiments of this thesis
as described in Section 4.1.1. A simplified scheme of adversarial training can
be seen in Figure 3.1
                                                                   Methods | 15




3.3      Deep learning architectures
As this thesis seeks to improve the robustness and transferability of state-of-
the-art residual CNNs a detailed description of their main properties will be
described here.

3.3.1 Convolutional layers
Convolutional neural networks are a subset of artificial neural networks
suitable for ECG analysis where some of the functions applied to layers
perform convolutions. These convolutions generally take the form of filters
that slide over an image or a time series and create an output that is the input
multiplied by the kernel as it slides over the input. See Figure 3.2 for a one-
dimensional example similar to the case for an ECG. There are usually multiple
kernels, which yield multi-dimensional output which is then aggregated.




Figure 3.2: Example of a one-dimensional convolutional layer without a bias.
The kernel (orange) contains the trainable parameters.

    As kernel parameters are the only weights being modified in the layer, and
as this kernel is generally small, there is a significant reduction in the number
of parameters being optimized compared to a fully connected layer. In Figure
3.2 a corresponding fully connected layer with the same number of input and
output nodes would have 8 × 6 = 48 weights compared to the 3 used in the
convolutional case. This reduction in parameters leads to faster training while
introducing a certain bias to the model where spatial features are sought after,
thus making the model ideal for computer vision and time series analysis where
a pattern at an unknown location in the sequence is sought after, as for ECG
16 | Methods




analysis. These layers are generally also combined with pooling layers, which
help aggregate stacked layers, and residual connections, which speed up the
training of the model by introducing skip-connections which skip select layers.

3.3.2 Model architecture
The model architecture used in this thesis is the residual CNN proposed
in [1] due to its good performance for ECG classification and regression.
This architecture consists of stacked residual blocks which in turn consist
of convolutional layers and residual connections coupled with common
deep learning techniques such as batch normalization and dropout. The
model’s final layers consist of a normal linear (dense) layer followed by a
sigmoidal activation in the case of classification which thus outputs an estimate
probability for the class being positive. See Figure 3.3 for a detailed schema
of the architecture. The architecture used in this thesis is slightly modified,
however, by replacing all ReLU activation functions with Gaussian Error
Linear Units, GELUs, as these have been shown to increase the robustness of
adversarial training [34]. The GELU activation is similar to ReLU but allows
for some negative values and a smoother transition for outputs from positive to
negative inputs. For a comparison of the two activation functions, see Figure
3.4.




               Conv BN ReLU    ResBlk ResBlk ... ResBlk ResBlk     Dense




                               Max     1x1
                              Pooling Conv


                      Conv BN ReLU Dropout     Conv         BN ReLU Dropout




Figure 3.3:       The residual convolutional neural network model
architecture used in this thesis, replacing the ReLU layers with
GELU. (Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) [1]
                                                        Methods | 17




                       3
                             ReLU
                             GELU

                       2



              f (x)    1



                       0



                      −1
                       −3   −2   −1   0   1   2   3
                                      x



Figure 3.4: Comparison of the ReLU and GELU activation functions.
18 | Methods
                                                            Implementation | 19




Chapter 4

Implementation

This chapter details the experiments done in this thesis and the implementation
of these. This includes details regarding training such as model training and
loss functions (Section 4.1), details of the adversarial robustness experiments
(Section 4.2), and details of the transferability experiments (Section 4.3). This
chapter also contains the results of the experiments (Section 4.4) and the
discussion regarding these (Section 4.5).


4.1      Model training
Models were trained on ECG samples for three different tasks: atrial
fibrillation classification, sex classification, and age prediction. All models
used the same architecture as shown in Figure 3.3 with the age prediction
regression models omitting the final sigmoid layer.
    Models were trained using the AdamW optimizer using the recommended
optimizer parameters β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, ϵ = 1 × 10−8 , λ = 0.01 with
a learning rate of γ = 1 × 10−3 [35]. A batch size of 32 was also used in
accordance with [1]. The model parameters were optimized using binary-cross
entropy loss for the classification tasks and using mean squared error for the
age prediction.

4.1.1 Adversarial training
Some models were also adversarially trained. This adversarial training was
performed by training on adversarially modified training samples. Adversarial
training was only initialized after an initial warm-up period where the model
was trained normally.
20 | Implementation




    Similar to [31] the loss during adversarial training was the average
between the standard and adversarial loss where the adversarial loss is
defined as L(xadv , y) where xadv is the corresponding adversarial example
generated through 10-iteration APGD [19] with random initialization within
the perturbation radius ε under the ℓ∞ norm. A scaling of the adversarial radius
ε using an exponential schedule is also employed using parameters εmin and
εmax which represent the minimum and maximum epsilon respectively during
scheduling. This lets the model converge before introducing heavily perturbed
adversarial examples.


4.2     Robustness experiment
Three PTB-XL models were trained for each of the three tasks (nine models
in total) using an 80/10/10 training, validation, and test split. All model
cases were trained for 20 epochs. For each task, two out of the three models
were adversarially trained. These used a warm-up period of 10 epochs with a
common εmin = 1×10−3 and εmax = 1×10−2 and εmax = 5×10−2 respectively
and thus a 10 epoch period of adversarial training. The last model for each task
was trained without adversarial training as a baseline. See the left-hand side
of Tables 4.1 to 4.3 for an overview of these training details.
    The robust performance of these was then evaluated by measuring the
performance on the test set under 10-APGD adversarial attacks for various
ε. For atrial fibrillation the performance is measured using AUPRC, as ROC
curves can be optimistic for unbalanced datasets [36], AUROC is used for sex
classification, and mean absolute error is used for age prediction.


4.3     Transferability experiment
The models trained in the initial robustness experiments were then fine-tuned
on CODE. The fine-tuned models were trained using 10% of the data and tested
using 10%, using learning rate γ = 1 × 10−4 . The low amount of training data
was used to simulate a fine-tuning environment where data is more scarce.
For atrial fibrillation, a baseline was also normally trained on 90% of the
data. The performance of the models for each task was then compared, using
a 500-iteration bootstrap and presenting the value and interquartile ranges of
the metric.
    For the atrial fibrillation classification models the robustness experiment
in Section 4.2 is also done for the fine-tuned models and the CODE baseline
                                                               Implementation | 21




model. An attempt at fine-tuning using smaller data sizes was also performed
for sex classification in order to compare the performance on even smaller data
sizes.


4.4      Results
Figures 4.1 to 4.3 display the results of the robustness experiments. Each
figure shows a comparison of three models, a baseline which is normally
trained and the two fine-tuned models using εmax = 0.05 and εmax = 0.01
respectively. Note the consistent performance of the adversarial models up
until the maximum ε they were trained on and the rapid decrease for larger ε.
Also, note the immediate drop in performance for the non-adversarially trained
models.
    Tables 4.1 to 4.3 show the results of the transferability experiments as
the clean performance, i.e. non-perturbed, on the target dataset. The tables
show details including training size, length, and time for the original dataset
trained on and, if fine-tuning was done, the corresponding data size fine-tuned
on and for what size. As all fine-tuning is done for 10 epochs this column
has been omitted. Note the very similar performance of the models for sex
classification and the larger differences for age prediction and atrial fibrillation
classification. The interquartile ranges seem to indicate significant differences
in the latter cases. Also, observe that for atrial fibrillation one of the fine-tuned
adversarially trained models outperforms a non-adversarially trained model
trained for a much higher amount of iterations and more data on the target
dataset.
    Figure 4.4 shows the robust performance of the fine-tuned models
predicting atrial fibrillation. The models here are the same models as the ones
shown in Table 4.1, displaying a 95% percentile interval using bootstrap. This
shows a clear higher performance of the adversarial models for all ε and is
most significant around ε = 0.005.
    Figure 4.5 displays the performance comparison for different data sizes
fine-tuned when classifying sex. The left-most points are the ones displayed in
Table 4.2, while the other points show similarly fine-tuned models but instead
using 1% and 0.1% of the dataset for training respectively. No large difference
between the models can be observed, but both adversarial models have a higher
performance when trained on the smallest dataset (where n = 346).
22 | Implementation




4.5      Discussion
The results in Figures 4.1 to 4.3 clearly show the impact of adversarial training
on the robustness of the model. Adversarial training with a higher εmax seems
to yield a higher accuracy for higher εmax in exchange for lower clean accuracy
and for very low εmax . This same behavior can be seen for all three tasks. It is
also interesting to note that the adversarially trained model using εmax = 0.01
for the classification of atrial fibrillation surpasses the clean performance of
the base model, this is also in line with [31] which does similar experiments
for predicting atrial fibrillation. The results are also in accordance with the
robustness accuracy trade-off as described in [37], where a higher εmax yields
a more robust model but lower clean accuracy.
    Tables 4.1 to 4.3 show that the adversarially trained models seem to be
performing better when fine-tuned when compared to their clean performance
on PTB-XL (as seen in Figures 4.1 to 4.3). However, the differences in
performance between the models seem to vary between tasks. For example,
classifying atrial fibrillation (Table 4.1) shows a large performance boost for
the εmax = 0.01 adversarially trained model compared to the normally trained
and fine-tuned models. Meanwhile, for classifying sex the fine-tuned models
show practically identical performance.
    A potential reason for the discrepancy between tasks is how the data is
balanced for the different tasks. For atrial fibrillation, there are much fewer
positive samples than negative ones in both datasets while sex has a similar
magnitude in both classes. The latter would thus yield many examples of both
negative and positive samples and thus let the fine-tuned models converge
faster to a common model, while the atrial fibrillation relies more on the
generalization capabilities of the original models. Figure 4.5 strengthens this
somewhat by showing that the adversarial models seem to perform slightly
better when extremely limited data amounts are available. Though additional
experiments are needed to establish the significance of this effect.
    Another reason for the differences in performance between the tasks could
be the presence of noisy labels for atrial fibrillation. Sex and age are rarely
mislabelled in the data while the presence or absence of atrial fibrillation can
be misdiagnosed, thus leading to incorrect labels that can severely misdirect
the model. Many medical conditions can also be diﬀicult to classify binarily,
for example, a patient could have only occasional atrial fibrillation which can
make general diagnosis diﬀicult from a single ECG.
    As seen in Figure 4.4 the robust performance of the fine-tuned adversarial
models is significantly higher than the corresponding base models thus also
                                                                           Implementation | 23




                            1.0
                                                                                base
                                                                                adv. 5e-2
                            0.8
                                                                                adv. 1e-2


                            0.6

                    AUPRC
                            0.4


                            0.2


                            0.0
                                  0   0.001   0.005    0.01      0.05     0.1         0.5
                                                         ε


            Figure 4.1: Robust performance classifying atrial fibrillation on PTB-XL for
            baseline (base) and two adversarially trained models with εmax = 0.05 (adv.
            5e-2) and εmax = 0.01 (adv. 1e-2) respectively.


            signaling that robustness is somewhat transferred when fine-tuning, even when
            fine-tuning is done through normal training. As expected, since the fine-tuning
            is done normally and not adversarially, the comparison between Figure 4.4
            and Figure 4.1 clearly shows that the robust performance is still significantly
            worse after fine-tuning. This hints at a relationship between fine-tuning and
            robustness where fine-tuning’s smaller adjustments of the model parameters
            transfer some of the original model’s robustness to the new dataset.

            Table 4.1: Clean performance of various models classifying atrial fibrillation
            on the CODE dataset measured by AUPRC. Under different configurations of
            training in PTB-XL training and fine-tuning on CODE for 10 epochs.

                Training, lr=1e-3                               Fine-tuning, lr=1e-4
                                                                                            AUPRC
Dataset   Epochs Size       Adv. train            t (min)     Dataset Size      t (min)
CODE      10     311196 no                        99          -        -        -           0.685 (0.675-0.700)
PTB-XL    20     17418      no                    15          CODE     34583 10             0.685 (0.673-0.699)
PTB-XL    20     17418      yes, εmax = 0.01      40          CODE     34583 10             0.732 (0.721-0.746)
PTB-XL    20     17418      yes, εmax = 0.05      40          CODE     34583 10             0.684 (0.674-0.698)
24 | Implementation




                              1.0
                                                                                base
                                                                                adv. 5e-2
                              0.8
                                                                                adv. 1e-2


                              0.6

        AUROC
                              0.4


                              0.2


                              0.0
                                    0    0.001      0.005   0.01   0.05   0.1         0.5
                                                              ε


Figure 4.2: Robust performance classifying sex on PTB-XL for baseline (base)
and two adversarially trained models with εmax = 0.05 (adv. 5e-2) and εmax =
0.01 (adv. 1e-2) respectively.




                                        base
                                        adv. 5e-2
                                        adv. 1e-2




        Mean Absolute Error



                              101


                                    0    0.001      0.005   0.01   0.05   0.1         0.5
                                                              ε


Figure 4.3: Robust performance predicting age on PTB-XL for baseline (base)
and two adversarially trained models with εmax = 0.05 (adv. 5e-2) and εmax =
0.01 (adv. 1e-2) respectively.
                                                                                  Implementation | 25




             Table 4.2: Clean performance of various models classifying sex on the CODE
             dataset measured by AUROC. Under different configurations of training in
             PTB-XL training and fine-tuning on CODE for 10 epochs.

                    Training, lr=1e-3                            Fine-tuning, lr=1e-4
                                                                                                 AUROC
Dataset    Epochs     Size     Adv. train          t (min)     Dataset Size      t (min)
PTB-XL     20         17418 no                     15          CODE     34583 10                 0.8814 (0.8802-0.8826)
PTB-XL     20         17418 yes, εmax = 0.01       41          CODE     34583 10                 0.8809 (0.8796-0.8822)
PTB-XL     20         17418 yes, εmax = 0.05       40          CODE     34583 10                 0.8808 (0.8796-0.8819)



             Table 4.3: Clean performance of various models predicting age on the CODE
             dataset measured by mean absolute error. Under different configurations of
             training in PTB-XL training and fine-tuning on CODE for 10 epochs.

                     Training, lr=1e-3                                Fine-tuning, lr=1e-4
                                                                                                   MAE (years)
 Dataset    Epochs     Size     Adv. train           t (min)        Dataset Size      t (min)
 PTB-XL     20         17418 no                      15             CODE     34583 10              10.33 (10.30-10.36)
 PTB-XL     20         17418 yes, εmax = 0.01        39             CODE     34583 10              10.15 (10.12-10.18)
 PTB-XL     20         17418 yes, εmax = 0.05        41             CODE     34583 10              9.98 (9.96-10.02)



                                1.0
                                                                               base fine-tuned
                                                                               adv. 5e-2
                                0.8
                                                                               adv. 1e-2
                                                                               base CODE
                                0.6

                        AUPRC
                                0.4


                                0.2


                                0.0
                                      0   0.001   0.005      0.01       0.05     0.1       0.5
                                                               ε


             Figure 4.4: Robust performance on CODE classifying atrial fibrillation for
             baseline and the three fine-tuned models in Table 4.1. The error bars show
             95% percentile intervals using 500-iteration bootstrap.
26 | Implementation




                0.90
                                                          base fine-tuned
                                                          adv. 5e-2
                0.85                                      adv. 1e-2




        AUROC
                0.80



                0.75



                0.70
                       10%                  1%                       0.1%
                                       Training size


Figure 4.5: Performance on CODE classifying sex for fine-tuned baseline and
the two adversarial models in Table 4.2 for different sizes of the training set of
CODE. All models were fine-tuned for 10 epochs.
                                              Conclusions and future work | 27




Chapter 5

Conclusions and future work

This chapter describes the general conclusions from the experiments done in
this thesis (Section 5.1). Furthermore, it discusses limitations and future work
(Section 5.2) and sustainability and ethical reflections (Section 5.3).


5.1     Conclusions
This thesis shows that standard deep learning models trained to classify
and regress from ECG samples are vulnerable to adversarial attacks and
that performance drops rapidly with even very small perturbations. This
shows a weakness in existing state-of-the-art models as it indicates a low
consistency when practically identical samples can be classified differently
and is a vulnerability against potential adversaries that wish to manipulate the
models.
    When comparing to other results such as [31] the behavior of APGD seems
to be much alike that of normal PGD, while also being slightly better at finding
worse adversarial examples. The introduction of APGD also allows for easier
reproducibility of this work and comparisons.
    The results also show that ECG deep learning models can be made robust
using adversarial training, which yields an almost consistent performance
up until the maximum ε that the adversarial training has used for training.
However, the performance drops rapidly for larger ε than that, showing that
adversarial training only generalizes well within the perturbation threshold.
Another challenge is that the training itself has a high computational cost.
    Fine-tuning adversarially trained models also seems to have a higher
performance on the new dataset than corresponding non-adversarially trained
models, especially when comparing the difference to the performance on the
28 | Conclusions and future work




pre-trained dataset. However, this claim seems to vary between tasks and data
distributions, and investigating how the differences between the tasks and data
distributions impact the transferability is a potential avenue for future work.
    The results also indicate that fine-tuning using adversarially trained models
yields a slight increase in performance compared to non-adversarially trained
models while also retaining some robustness to adversarial attacks. This
suggests that the representations made from adversarially trained models are
more suitable for fine-tuning as this yields both increased robustness and
performance in the domain transferred to.


5.2      Limitations and future work
The main limitations in this thesis are due to computational costs and a limited
number of experiments. Further work should thus ideally promote methods
alleviating these challenges and suggested avenues for future research will be
made here.

5.2.1 Computational cost
Adversarially training models using several iterations of PGD on large
numbers of data can be very expensive as the computational time during
training increases linearly with the number of iterations. This is a limitation
as models suitable for real-life data need to be trained for longer durations
to achieve higher performance. This indicates the need for future work to
investigate faster forms of adversarial training such as using FastAT [28]
or GradAlign [38]. The computational cost of the experiments has also
been limiting the amount of models available for the experiments. Statistical
analysis using cross-validation would have been valuable, but as these further
multiply training times they were outside the realm of feasibility. The
number of tasks and datasets investigated also had to be limited due to the
computational cost.

5.2.2 Generalizability
The experiments in this thesis have been limited to certain setups using
specific models and datasets. As these are limited the generalizability of the
claims made here is uncertain, especially those regarding the transferability of
adversarially trained models. To further establish these claims larger studies
using more datasets should be conducted, to see if the claims generalize
                                              Conclusions and future work | 29




beyond CODE and PTB-XL. Furthermore studying the use of more general
models suitable for transfer learning could also be relevant, for example,
studying how the multi-label model proposed in [1] is affected by adversarial
training in terms of transferability and transfer learning to new tasks. This
would also confirm the findings of [5] that adversarial training improves
transfer learning.
    One could also see adversarial training as a type of data augmentation
using the worst possible augments. Therefore it could also be relevant to
study that relationship and comparing to data augmentation methods for
ECGs such as [32]. Another approach could be to randomly integrate
adversarial examples, much like how data augmentation often depends on
random additions, to see whether the robustness and transferability of the
model improve.

5.2.3 Clinical relevance
Ultimately this work could bring large benefits in clinical settings, especially
in developing countries or for smaller hospitals where data sizes are small.
For this to be done, however, one needs to further test these models in real-life
settings, preferably using adversarially trained versions of general multi-label
models such as the one presented in [1]. Furthermore, in a real-life setting, a
model should ideally be able to adapt to new incoming data affected by shifts
in the distribution caused by changes such as new equipment or routines. This
work helps alleviate this issue but does not solve it as performance on new data
distributions without fine-tuning is still low.


5.3      Reflections
As this thesis is centered around developing tech to be used in healthcare it
mainly contributes to the United Nations (UN) Sustainable Development Goal
(SDG) number 3, Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all
ages. The SDG targets 3.4, reducing premature mortality, and 3.8, access to
universal healthcare, are both especially relevant. This thesis contributes to
3.4 by introducing methods that can assist in predicting early diseases through
ECGs. It also contributes to 3.8 by introducing a method for creating general
models that can allow high performance on new data. This can be key in
developing countries where data might be limited and can thus allow for a
cheap way of diagnosing key diseases especially if coupled with cheaper ECG
tools such as wearables [39].
30 | Conclusions and future work




    This thesis also contributes to cybersecurity as it provides a clear method
for making deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks, which can
be generated with malicious intent. This could help prevent scenarios such
as insurance fraud where an adversary could generate ECG samples using
adversarial attacks that would incorrectly diagnose the person. The relevance
of this today is, however, extremely limited but could be more relevant in the
future as automatic diagnosing becomes more prevalent. This can be seen as
a weak link to SDG target 16.3, promoting the rule of law.
    This thesis also helps alleviate some ethical concerns with machine
learning in medical settings. Mainly, as this thesis partly seeks to make
deep learning models analyzing ECGs robust it helps establish trust with its
users as the model will make consistent predictions around some perturbation
radius ε. Also, creating more general models by using adversarial training
will presumably reduce biases toward dataset-specific features that could be
discriminatory in a clinical setting. For example, if a certain ethnicity, gender,
or age is overrepresented in the training data of a model then those biases
will carry over when applied in a clinical setting. More general models will,
however, inherently reduce these biases as they are more general.
    The above are also with risks, however. Deep learning models are not
perfect and often yield mistakes. Implementing those without supervision in
a real-life setting can therefore be dangerous, even if this work increases trust
in the models. A risk is therefore too rapid advancement of the field where
real lives can be at risk due to too early adaption without preceding clinical
studies.
                                                            References | 31




References

[1] A. H. Ribeiro, M. H. Ribeiro, G. M. M. Paixão, D. M. Oliveira, P. R.
    Gomes, J. A. Canazart, M. P. S. Ferreira, C. R. Andersson, P. W.
    Macfarlane, W. Meira Jr., T. B. Schön, and A. L. P. Ribeiro, “Automatic
    diagnosis of the 12-lead ECG using a deep neural network,” Nature
    Communications, vol. 11, no. 1, p. 1760, 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41467-
    020-15432-4 [Pages ix, 1, 6, 10, 16, 19, and 29.]

[2] L. Lu, T. Zhu, A. H. Ribeiro, L. Clifton, E. Zhao, J. Zhou, A. L. P.
    Ribeiro, Y.-T. Zhang, and D. A. Clifton, “Decoding 2.3 million ECGs:
    Interpretable deep learning for advancing cardiovascular diagnosis and
    mortality risk stratification,” European Heart Journal - Digital Health,
    p. ztae014, 2024. doi: 10.1093/ehjdh/ztae014 [Page 1.]

[3] X. Han, Y. Hu, L. Foschini, L. Chinitz, L. Jankelson, and R. Ranganath,
    “Deep learning models for electrocardiograms are susceptible to
    adversarial attack,” Nature Medicine, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 360–363, 2020.
    doi: 10.1038/s41591-020-0791-x [Pages 1, 7, and 10.]

[4] A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras, and A. Vladu,
    “Towards Deep Learning Models Resistant to Adversarial Attacks,”
    2018. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJzIBfZAb
    [Page 1.]

[5] Z. Deng, L. Zhang, K. Vodrahalli, K. Kawaguchi, and J. Y. Zou, “Ad-
    versarial Training Helps Transfer Learning via Better Representations,”
    in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34. Curran
    Associates, Inc., 2021, pp. 25 179–25 191. [Pages 2 and 29.]

[6] S. Chatterjee, R. S. Thakur, R. N. Yadav, L. Gupta, and D. K.
    Raghuvanshi, “Review of noise removal techniques in ECG signals,” IET
    Signal Processing, vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 569–590, 2020. doi: 10.1049/iet-
    spr.2020.0104 [Page 4.]
32 | References




 [7] T. Bai, J. Luo, J. Zhao, B. Wen, and Q. Wang, “Recent Advances
     in Adversarial Training for Adversarial Robustness,” in Twenty-
     Ninth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 5,
     2021. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2021/591. ISSN 1045-0823 pp. 4312–4321.
     [Pages 4, 8, and 9.]

 [8] M. I. Jordan and T. M. Mitchell, “Machine learning: Trends,
     perspectives, and prospects,” Science, vol. 349, no. 6245, pp.
     255–260, 2015. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa8415. [Online]. Available:
     https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.aaa8415 [Page 5.]

 [9] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
     Ł. ukasz Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is All you Need,” in
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 30. Curran
     Associates, Inc., 2017. [Page 5.]

[10] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
     recognition,” 2015. [Page 6.]

[11] K. C. Siontis, P. A. Noseworthy, Z. I. Attia, and P. A. Friedman,
     “Artificial intelligence-enhanced electrocardiography in cardiovascular
     disease management,” Nature Reviews Cardiology, vol. 18, no. 7, pp.
     465–478, 2021. doi: 10.1038/s41569-020-00503-2 [Pages 6 and 7.]

[12] D. Adedinsewo, R. E. Carter, Z. Attia, P. Johnson, A. H. Kashou,
     J. L. Dugan, M. Albus, J. M. Sheele, F. Bellolio, P. A. Friedman,
     F. Lopez-Jimenez, and P. A. Noseworthy, “Artificial Intelligence-
     Enabled ECG Algorithm to Identify Patients With Left Ventricular
     Systolic Dysfunction Presenting to the Emergency Department With
     Dyspnea,” Circulation: Arrhythmia and Electrophysiology, vol. 13,
     no. 8, p. e008437, 2020. doi: 10.1161/CIRCEP.120.008437 [Page 6.]

[13] W.-Y. Ko, K. C. Siontis, Z. I. Attia, R. E. Carter, S. Kapa, S. R. Ommen,
     S. J. Demuth, M. J. Ackerman, B. J. Gersh, A. M. Arruda-Olson,
     J. B. Geske, S. J. Asirvatham, F. Lopez-Jimenez, R. A. Nishimura,
     P. A. Friedman, and P. A. Noseworthy, “Detection of Hypertrophic
     Cardiomyopathy Using a Convolutional Neural Network-Enabled
     Electrocardiogram,” Journal of the American College of Cardiology,
     vol. 75, no. 7, pp. 722–733, 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2019.12.030
     [Page 6.]
                                                              References | 33




[14] E. M. Lima, A. H. Ribeiro, G. M. M. Paixão, M. H. Ribeiro, M. M.
     Pinto-Filho, P. R. Gomes, D. M. Oliveira, E. C. Sabino, B. B. Duncan,
     L. Giatti, S. M. Barreto, W. Meira Jr, T. B. Schön, and A. L. P. Ribeiro,
     “Deep neural network-estimated electrocardiographic age as a mortality
     predictor,” Nature Communications, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 5117, 2021. doi:
     10.1038/s41467-021-25351-7 [Page 6.]

[15] A. H. Ribeiro, M. H. Ribeiro, G. M. Paixão, D. M. Oliveira, P. R. Gomes,
     J. A. Canazart, M. P. Ferreira, C. R. Andersson, P. W. Macfarlane, W. M.
     Jr., T. B. Schön, and A. L. P. Ribeiro, “CODE dataset,” 2021. [Pages 6
     and 11.]

[16] P. Wagner, N. Strodthoff, R.-D. Bousseljot, W. Samek, and T. Schaeffter,
     “PTB-XL, a large publicly available electrocardiography dataset.”
     [Pages ix, 6, 7, 11, and 12.]

[17] N. Carlini and D. Wagner, “Towards Evaluating the Robustness of Neural
     Networks,” in 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP),
     2017. doi: 10.1109/SP.2017.49. ISSN 2375-1207 pp. 39–57. [Page 7.]

[18] D. Su, H. Zhang, H. Chen, J. Yi, P.-Y. Chen, and Y. Gao, “Is Robustness
     the Cost of Accuracy? – A Comprehensive Study on the Robustness
     of 18 Deep Image Classification Models,” in Computer Vision – ECCV
     2018, V. Ferrari, M. Hebert, C. Sminchisescu, and Y. Weiss, Eds.
     Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2018. doi: 10.1007/978-3-
     030-01258-8_39. ISBN 978-3-030-01258-8 pp. 644–661. [Page 8.]

[19] F. Croce and M. Hein, “Reliable evaluation of adversarial robustness with
     an ensemble of diverse parameter-free attacks,” in Proceedings of the
     37th International Conference on Machine Learning, ser. ICML’20, vol.
     119. JMLR.org, 2020, pp. 2206–2216. [Pages 8, 9, 13, and 20.]

[20] J. H. Metzen, T. Genewein, V. Fischer, and B. Bischoff, “On Detecting
     Adversarial Perturbations,” 2017. [Page 9.]

[21] Q. Wang, W. Guo, K. Zhang, A. G. Ororbia II, X. Xing, X. Liu, and C. L.
     Giles, “Learning Adversary-Resistant Deep Neural Networks,” 2017.
     [Page 9.]

[22] S. Kotyan and D. V. Vargas, “Evolving Robust Neural Architectures to
     Defend from Adversarial Attacks,” 2020. [Page 9.]
34 | References




[23] N. Carlini, A. Athalye, N. Papernot, W. Brendel, J. Rauber, D. Tsipras,
     I. Goodfellow, A. Madry, and A. Kurakin, “On Evaluating Adversarial
     Robustness,” 2019. [Page 9.]

[24] A. Mumuni and F. Mumuni, “Data augmentation: A comprehensive
     survey of modern approaches,” Array, vol. 16, p. 100258, 2022. doi:
     10.1016/j.array.2022.100258 [Page 9.]

[25] L. Schott, J. Rauber, M. Bethge, and W. Brendel, “Towards the
     first adversarially robust neural network model on MNIST,” arXiv:
     Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018. [Online]. Available:
     https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Towards-the-first-adversarial
     ly-robust-neural-model-Schott-Rauber/fd7789de401811fd8692466b8d
     49230e7184655f [Page 9.]

[26] T. Pang, X. Yang, Y. Dong, H. Su, and J. Zhu, “Bag of Tricks
     for Adversarial Training,” in International Conference on Learning
     Representations, 2020. [Page 9.]

[27] P. Maini, E. Wong, and Z. Kolter, “Adversarial Robustness Against the
     Union of Multiple Perturbation Models,” in Proceedings of the 37th
     International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2020. ISSN
     2640-3498 pp. 6640–6650. [Page 9.]

[28] E. Wong, L. Rice, and J. Z. Kolter, “Fast is better than free:
     Revisiting adversarial training,” in International Conference on
     Learning Representations, 2019. [Pages 9 and 28.]

[29] K. F. Hossain, S. A. Kamran, A. Tavakkoli, and X. Ma, “ECG-
     ATK-GAN: Robustness Against Adversarial Attacks on ECGs Using
     Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks,” in Applications of
     Medical Artificial Intelligence: First International Workshop, AMAI
     2022, Held in Conjunction with MICCAI 2022, Singapore, September
     18, 2022, Proceedings.      Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2022.
     doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-17721-7_8. ISBN 978-3-031-17720-0 pp. 68–
     78. [Page 10.]

[30] J. Shao, S. Geng, Z. Fu, W. Xu, T. Liu, and S. Hong, “CardioDefense:
     Defending against adversarial attack in ECG classification with
     adversarial distillation training,” Biomedical Signal Processing and
     Control, vol. 91, p. 105922, 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.bspc.2023.105922
     [Page 10.]
                                                              References | 35




[31] L. Ma and L. Liang, “Enhance CNN Robustness Against Noises for
     Classification of 12-Lead ECG with Variable Length,” in 2020 19th
     IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications
     (ICMLA), 2020. doi: 10.1109/ICMLA51294.2020.00137 pp. 839–846.
     [Pages 10, 14, 20, 22, and 27.]

[32] A. Raghu, D. Shanmugam, E. Pomerantsev, J. Guttag, and C. M. Stultz,
     “Data Augmentation for Electrocardiograms,” in Proceedings of the
     Conference on Health, Inference, and Learning, 2022. ISSN 2640-3498
     pp. 282–310. [Pages 10 and 29.]

[33] A. H. Ribeiro, G. M. Paixao, E. M. Lima, M. Horta Ribeiro,
     M. M. Pinto Filho, P. R. Gomes, D. M. Oliveira, W. Meira Jr,
     T. B. Schon, and A. L. P. Ribeiro, “CODE-15%: a large scale
     annotated dataset of 12-lead ECGs,” 2021. [Online]. Available:
     https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4916206 [Page 11.]

[34] V. Singla, S. Singla, S. Feizi, and D. Jacobs, “Low Curvature Activations
     Reduce Overfitting in Adversarial Training,” in Proceedings of the
     IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021, pp.
     16 423–16 433. [Page 16.]

[35] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization,”
     in International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
     [Page 19.]

[36] J. Davis and M. Goadrich, “The relationship between Precision-Recall
     and ROC curves,” in Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
     on Machine Learning, ser. ICML ’06. New York, NY, USA: Association
     for Computing Machinery, 2006. doi: 10.1145/1143844.1143874. ISBN
     978-1-59593-383-6 pp. 233–240. [Page 20.]

[37] H. Zhang, Y. Yu, J. Jiao, E. Xing, L. E. Ghaoui, and M. Jordan,
     “Theoretically Principled Trade-off between Robustness and Accuracy,”
     in Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
     Learning, 2019. ISSN 2640-3498 pp. 7472–7482. [Page 22.]

[38] M. Andriushchenko and N. Flammarion, “Understanding and Improving
     Fast Adversarial Training,” in Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 16 048–
     16 059. [Page 28.]
36 | References




[39] K. Bayoumy, M. Gaber, A. Elshafeey, O. Mhaimeed, E. H. Dineen, F. A.
     Marvel, S. S. Martin, E. D. Muse, M. P. Turakhia, K. G. Tarakji, and
     M. B. Elshazly, “Smart wearable devices in cardiovascular care: Where
     we are and how to move forward,” Nature Reviews Cardiology, vol. 18,
     no. 8, pp. 581–599, 2021. doi: 10.1038/s41569-021-00522-7 [Page 29.]
TRITA-EECS-EX-2024:437

www.kth.se
